---
title: Outreach
layout: document
permalink: /about/outreach/
hero: /img/hero/outreach.jpg
---

# Outreach

According to Dean Kamen, founder of FIRST, FIRST wishes “to transform our culture
by creating a world where science and technology are celebrated and where young
people dream of becoming science and technology leaders.” In order to follow
FIRST’s vision, all participating teams are encouraged to instill an
appreciation of the real-life rewards and career opportunities to others within
their supportive community.

## <i class="first">FIRST</i> Community {#first-community}

### <i class="first">FIRST</i> Workshop {#first-workshop}

The Monta Vista Robotics Team (MVRT) held a workshop in December of 2011,
hosting nine different teams, on how we have sustained ourselves for the last
fifteen years. FIRST Coordinator Jim Beck also came to speak about additional
FIRST news and about how MVRT is truly a role model team in the bay area. We
held several different stations the different teams could go to, which included
mechanical, electrical, finance, documentation, public relations, and media.
Each of the division leads presented to a group of individuals about what their
divisions do throughout the year, and provide any helpful advice for coming
years. Each team received a comprehensive document called the FIRST Aid kit that
our team made for all FIRST teams in need.

### Mentoring Other Teams

MVRT provides help to teams around the community, in state, and out of country.
We provide help by keeping in contact with teams with email and video chats.

Here is a list of teams MVRT has mentored and started:

|----------+---------------------------------------------------|
| Kickoff  | 649, 751, 2135, 2489, 2643, 3022, 3482, 2813      |
| Workshop | 256, 670, 840, 2367, 2473, 2643, 3022, 3501, 4186 |
| Away     | 3943                                              |
|==========+===================================================|

### FLL

FLL strives to inspire engineering to middle school students by arranging teams
to build NXT Mindstorm robots that completes a series of challenges. MVRT has
been responsible for mentoring FIRST Lego League teams in Lawson Middle School
and Kennedy Middle School. MVRT also volunteers at FLL tournaments by helping as
judges of both project and robot categories. To reach out to other FLL teams, we
also created a FLL Binder on the website to help coaches start and run a team.
In 2012-2013 season 3 teams went to NorCal championships and 1 of our teams got
the highest score there. In 2013-2014 3 out of our 5 teams made it to the NorCal
championships.

### FTC

FTC (FIRST Tech Challenge) is another high school level competition that FIRST
offers. FTC works with tetrix parts to build and program a mini robot to compete
in competitions, and is considered a bridge between FLL and FRC. MVRT has
started a FTC team in Monta Vista High School to provide assistance in all
aspects of FIRST and its programs. In its rookie year, MVRT’s FTC team made it
to the semi-finals as the 7th seed team.

## Local Outreach

### ThinkFIRST

ThinkFIRST is an after school program at Lincoln Elementary School, and teaches
basic physics concepts to elementary school students through creative
experimentation. This program was started when the Gifted and Talented Education
(GATE) program at Lincoln Elementary School was canceled due to financial cuts.
The Monta Vista Robotics Team stepped in by providing high school student
teachers and supplies to continue the physics program. Such activities included
building marshmallow bridges to demonstrate center of gravity, mixing vinegar
and baking soda to demonstrate chemical reactions, and constructing newspaper
roller coasters to demonstrate kinetic and potential energy.

### Future Stars Robotics Program

MVRT partnered up with Future Stars, a college preparatory program for
underprivileged minority students, and two other FIRST teams (846 and 1868) to
create a robotics summer camp. We held two sessions, with each session meeting
six days in the span of two weeks to teach the engineering process, including
designing, building, programming, and testing their robots made from the NXT
LEGO Mindstorm Kit. Along the way, the students learned about center of gravity,
friction, gear ratios, and presentation skills. At the end of each session, the
teams competed with each other on a friendly competition with the FIRST Lego
League challenges.

### E-Stem

In August 2008, we supported Mike Honda’s STEM initiative and bill by speaking
at a press event and demoing our robot to an audience of over a hundred. Student
Aravindh and mentor Mr. Shinta spoke at this press event. We also demonstrated
our robot to show the importance of STEM education in our society and the
importance of the passage of the bill (which was co-authored by then Senator
Obama) Also, for the 2009 Kickoff we had a representative from the congressman's
office speak to our team and the guest teams about STEM education.

### Kwan Academy

MVRT partners with Mr. Kwan at Kwan Academy teaching K-5 students introductory
math and science concepts. Every summer MVRT members help begin the student’s
journey into the building a simple robot. MVRT teaches these concepts through
creative experimentation and various kits including the Klutz and Engino Kits
used in the summer of 2013.

## International Outreach

### Red Cross Haiyan

During the first semester of the 2013-2014, Monta Vista Robotics joined Monta
Vista Red Cross in raising awareness of the Haiyan typhoon disaster and starting
a coin drive at our school. Along with Red Cross, MVRT encouraged students to
place labeled jars in classrooms to collect coins. It was a fun and great
experience to collaborate with another club on campus to support people in need
in other countries.

### Empower Kids Foundation

EmpowerKids Foundation is a non-profit organization that aims to support
underprivileged children in rural northern India by providing them with
educational supplies. It launched its School Adoption Program in February 2010
with a specific focus on helping students from grades 3 and 4. Currently, they
are supporting 50 students in an afterschool program with school supplies and
additional teachers. Their founder, Vivek Kumar, started this program with the
goal of giving back to communities in India who have supported him in his
education. Monta Vista Robotics Team helped EmpowerKids launch its operations,
and continues to further support its initiatives. MVRT has partnered up with
Empower Kids by writing PenPal letters with the students and raising money for
the foundation through fundraisers and donations.
