---
title: "Cupertino Courier Article: Tech Studies"
author: Melissa Matchak
date: February 28, 2001
layout: post
---

Picking up small balls and placing them in a tower may not seem like a difficult
task for most high school students. Creating a robot that can do the same,
however, is a challenge welcomed by the Monta Vista High School Robotics Team.

For six weeks, the team worked day and night to design and build a robot that
could complete the task, and compete against robots created by other high school
robotics teams at regional and national competitions.

Organized by FIRST--For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology, a
nonprofit organization based on the East Coast with the goal of getting high
school students interested in the technology field, the competitions offer
students the chance to create their own robot, based on specific goals.

Henry Chen, a senior at Monta Vista and president of the team, said that each
year, the approximately 600 teams nationwide are given instructions to create a
robot that can complete certain tasks, or play certain games. There are also
size and weight specifications for the robot.

After receiving instructions in early January, the team then had six weeks to
complete its robot and ship it off for the competition. Chen said this is the
fourth year his team has competed.

"One of the coolest things about the competition is seeing the several hundred
other ways of building the robot," Chen said.

Chen said the team of approximately 60 students had to first determine a
strategy for creating a robot that could complete the required tasks. After
designing the robot, the building began with the kit of basic parts provided by
the organization, and raw materials, such as wood and metal, purchased by the
team.

According to Chen, the robot cost approximately $10,000 to make. He said the
team receives grants from Bay Area tech companies, including NASA, Hitachi,
Xilinx and others, totaling approximately $30,000 each year. It costs $4,000 to
attend each competition.

The robotics team is an extracurricular activity, with students working around
required school work and other activities to build the robot. Part of the team
also works to create a 3-D computer animation of the robot for another part of
the competition.

Chen said the first year the Monta Vista team competed, it won an honorable
mention for its animated robot. In the past two years, Chen said the team has
placed fourth out of approximately 50 teams.

Before attending the competition, the aspiring engineers must prepare
themselves. Chen said the members who have attended past competitions teach the
new members how to act in the fun, but tense, atmosphere. Team members must be
ready to repair the robot quickly, in case it breaks down.

Chen, who has been a member of the team for the past three years, said he has
always been interested in computers and technology, but being part of the
robotics team solidified his interest in the field. He said he decided to join
the team after seeing how the members worked together. Interest in robotics may
run in the family. His sister was one of the students who started the robotics
team at Monta Vista four years ago.

"I saw the tightness of the group, how everyone gets to know each other quickly,
and that really drew me in," Chen said. "It's a good simulation of an actual
workplace, with students learning to balance school work and extracurricular
activities."

This year's regional competition will take place on March 23 and 24 at San Jose
State University. The national competition, which the Monta Vista team also
plans to attend, will take place April 4 through 7 in Orlando, Fla.
