---
title: "Cupertino Courier Article: Dueling machines square off in robot games"
author: Erin Hussey
date: October 25, 2006
layout: post
---

Students from Homestead, Lynbrook and Monta Vista high schools will compete Oct.
28 with robotics teams from across Northern California in the 2006 Western
Region Robotics Forum California Robot games. Robots weighing 120 pounds will
take center stage in three-versus-three alliances, trying to accurately shoot
7-inch balls into low corner and high goals, as well as climb a 30-degree ramp.
The robot action is a combination of autonomous software control and human
remote control.

The off-season event is good training for competitions later in the year. Monta
Vista drafting teacher and team adviser Ted Shinta said, "The WRRF provides a
place for all the local teams to get together and help each other and do
trainings."

To compete, each year more than 1,000 teams have exactly six weeks to create and
build a working robot. And each year the game is different. Each year teams have
no idea what to expect until the rules and parts kits are delivered.

"I would best compare it to NASA putting the rover on Mars," said Monta Vista
robotics club president Pavan Datta. "They don't know what the terrain is like,
they don't know what the rover has to do, they don't really know if it is going
to work. They also have time restraints, weight restraints and budget
restraints."

Unlike many East Coast teams that have the luxury of working with and being
sponsored by a large technology corporation, the majority of West Coast
teams--including Monta Vista, Homestead and Lynbrook--must use their own ideas,
fundraising efforts and support from the community to succeed.

"The project is so technically challenging that parents' contributions are key
to our program's success," said Lynbrook parent mentor David Giandomenico, "not
only because we need their talents, but because the students learn much more

when working alongside these mentors." Giandomenico said many parents continue
to volunteer even after their child graduates.

"I find the experience teaching the students truly rewarding," he said, "and I
believe all the parents who help feel likewise."

In addition to parent support, the teams also depend on technology companies and
individuals from the Silicon Valley. For instance, the Homestead robotics team
has called upon one of its most famous alumnni, Apple Computer co-founder Steven
Wozniak, for financial support.

"I have known him over the years, and he's always been nice in donating things
to Homestead," said 40-year math teacher and team adviser Steven Headley.

Headley, who introduced the robotics program to Homestead in 1999, believes the
industrial arts are important to education.

"What I am really concerned about is that I have kids that have never touched a
tool," he said. "My thinking is that I hate for kids to miss something."

All three Fremont Union High Schools are in the process of modifying their
robots from last year's competition. While Homestead is making drastic changes,
Lynbrook and Monta Vista are only making sight adjustments. But walking away
with a first-place ribbon isn't what being on a robotics team is all about.

"I've learned how to build things, use machines, use tools, use creative ways to
solve problems," Homestead team member Yuanyu Chen said, "and things like
gracious professionalism and being nice to your opponents even if they beat
you."

In addition to time in the lab, the students also volunteer at local middle
schools, encouraging younger children to take an interest in engineering and
technology.

All three adult mentors said it is wonderful to see their students develop and
grow within the program, not just as engineers or designers, but as people.

"Whether or not they go into engineering, they get to experience how to lead and
work with the community," Shinta said.

_With budget costs of thousands of dollars, all three schools are always looking
for donations. For more information, contact Homestead at 408.522.2500, Lynbrook
at 408.257.0551 or Monta Vista at 408.366.7600._
