---
title: "El Estoque Article: Robotics Team Selected to Beta Test New Material"
author: Anandi Somasundaram
date: November 24, 2009
layout: post
---

Over 2,000 teams in the nation. Forty chosen. Two in California. One in Northern
California. The prestigious Robotics Team (MVRT) has been chosen to beta test
new material from their parent organization, For Inspiration and Recognition of
Science and Technology (FIRST). Beta testing involves trying to find any bugs in
the given material, which includes new hardware, modified software and laptop
from Labview, made by National Instruments. The laptop is an upgrade from the
Driverstation joystick the team usually used to communicate with their robot.
Electrical lead senior Mike He explained that the laptop improves the interface
between the driver and the robot. The laptop has a larger screen than the
joystick and helps all the sensors while the robot is on field and can even
attach a camera, which allows the driver to see the field.

"This gives the robot more mobility and flexibility," He said.

The team applied to beta test during the first week of school. The application
process included writing a detailed test plan about how they would handle
testing and stating the number of people on the team. MVRT President senior
Parag Kikla felt that MVRT'S large team of 120 members was an advantage in
regards to testing because work could be easily divided amongst them. After
sending in the application Aug. 24, FIRST informed the team that they had been
selected on Sept. 4. MVRT then signed a non-disclosure agreement with FIRST
stating they will not tell teams about the product's faults.

Testing is not costly, but does use up time and resources. Not only does MVRT
test for bugs, but it also holds required workshops to teach other teams about
the new material. Because MVRT is the only Northern California team to have the
new software, they must travel to teach other teams. Last weekend Nov. 14-15,
they hosted a workshop in Sacramento for teams in the area.

"It's an honor [to help teams in the community] ," Kikla said.
