---
title: "El Estoque Article: More than the robot to robotics team"
author: Kriti Garg
date: 2010-10-29
layout: post-nolink
---

The members of MV Robotics Team #115 are known for one thing—creating their
award-winning robots, year after year. However, beyond being involved in the
technical aspects of the team, members also take on roles as educators and
volunteers to make a difference both locally and abroad.

In the Bay Area, the team makes presentations at conferences, technology events,
and elementary school programs, and also mentors 12 other robotics teams in the
region. In the past year, Robotics has also raised funds and support for Haiti
and schools in India.

Officers showcased last year’s robot at the biannual ZER01 technology and art
festival in San Jose, which was held from Sept. 16-19, upon the request of BAE
Systems, a primary sponsor for the team. The team has also given presentations
at events for Lockheed Martin and NASA, both of which are also key sponsors.

“Companies sponsor us and ask us to give back to the community,” Director of
Engineering senior Karthik Kumaravel said. “We want to show appreciation for our
sponsors, so if they ask we always try to get involved in that.”

Member Sanath Mullapudi talks about the robot with an attendee at the BAE
Systems Fair. The team also seeks out community events to demonstrate at, such
as the Cupertino Fall Festival and Lunar Parade. At Toys for Tots events over
the past two years, children were guided on how to maneuver the robot, which
last year was designed to play a version of soccer on the competition field of
the FIRST competition. FIRST, which stands for For Inspiration and Recognition
of Science and Technology, is an organization which runs the FIRST Robotics
Competition, the robotics league the team belongs to.

“A goal of FIRST is to inspire young people [to pursue] engineering and
technology,” Kumaravel said. “CUSD got rid of [the Gifted and Talented Education
program] because of budget cuts, so we took that opportunity and [now] basically
run the entire GATE program at Lincoln [Elementary School]. We have a 10-week
curriculum and teach them about aerodynamics and such, basically to get them
interested in engineering.”

Robotics is also looking to mentor other robotics teams in the region. Last
year, they mentored four teams at the elementary school level and eight at the
middle school level. This year, they are looking to start a team at Fremont High
School, as it is the only school in the district without a team.

The team’s community outreach earned it the Chairman’s Award at the Silicon
Valley Regional competition last year, a highly prestigious award recognizing
the team for spreading science and technology throughout its community. The team
hopes to continue supporting charities such as Empower Kids, which aids school
systems in rural parts of India, and schools abroad, such as the Birla School of
Technology and Science, India’s first robotics institution. With the support of
last year’s Director of Operations Arun Kuchibhotla, a class of 2010 alumnus,
the Bits Pilani robotics team was able to compete in the United States and won
third place internationally.

This year, the team is working with other teams to create a robotics-focused
curriculum for local summer camps.

“[Last summer], all the children [at the camp] seemed pretty interested in
robotics,” Mechanical Lead senior Abhijaat Kelkar said. “[Our outreach] gives
the public more exposure to what FIRST is.”
