---
title: "Cupertino Patch Article: Robotics is More Than Rote"
author: Sarah Ravani
date: 2011-02-15
layout: post
---

Keen on mechanical engineering when he was in middle school, Karthik Kumaravel
was drawn to a robotics team demonstration in the middle of the rally court at a
back-to-school night. He knew then that when he made it to high school, he would
join the robotics team. Now a senior at Monta Vista High School, he’s done that,
and more.

Monta Vista High School’s Robotics Team works throughout the year to build
robots that can compete in regional and national competitions.

“It teaches them team work, organization and leadership, and that’s a really big
component of what we are emphasizing here,” said Ted Shinta, industrial
technology teacher at Monta Vista High.

Kumaravel joined the team when he entered high school and has since worked his
way up to the position of director of engineering on the team. He is in charge
of ensuring that all the mechanical and electrical components of the robot work
properly in the competitions. He also runs training sessions for new and
advanced team members, and has a hand in public relations as well, he said.

“We run like a Fortune 500 office,” Kumaravel said. “Our robotics club is for
everyone, because it gives you a chance to see how a company runs, you learn how
to finance, do business with others, etc. We have a place for everyone.”

According to Shinta, team mentor, there are 100 students on the team, and the
team members work to compete in at least two competitions a year.

Every January, the team competes in the For Inspiration and Recognition of
Science and Technology (FIRST) Robotics Competitions.

The competition consists of a challenge with certain rules that give the
students six weeks to build a robot that can engage in a game, like soccer. Each
team member is given a focus area with the overall team goal of using
imagination and limited resources, Shinta added.

“There is a lot of excitement on and off the field,” Kumaravel said. “You have
to think quick on your feet.” The team tends to engage mostly in regional
competitions; however, it has gone to nationals a number of times, Shinta said.

The team strives to strengthen its members by having mentors, either alumni or
those who have had a career in engineering, offer advice to students about their
futures and tips on how to build an effective robot, Kumaravel added.

Kumaravel said he has competed in nine official competitions and in two
competitions during the offseason.

In order for the teams to be able to compete, Shinta said the students are
required to get sponsorship from a business, like Google so that they have
funding to build their robot.

“A lot of times, the team will be sponsored by a major auto company and then
they will bring the students on their site to build the robot,” Shinta added.

In addition to working with other major companies in the area, the robotics team
at Monta Vista High also does outreach work to other local high schools to help
train their robotics teams. In an effort to inspire younger children to be
interested in engineering, Kumaravel said the team mentors kids at different
elementary and high schools.

The team also goes to local festivals and has fundraisers to raise money for
better technology programs in schools located in India and Mexico. The team also
focuses on completing community service.

The Monta Vista High School Robotics Team has been awarded the Chairman’s Award,
which, according to Kumaravel, is the most prestigious award, because it
recognizes all the work the team does with the robot, as well as its outreach
work.

“We have been trying to get it for 11 years, and now we have been a team for 14
years,” Kumaravel said. “Only one team gets it per region, and there are over
2,000 teams.”

In addition to numerous awards from competing in the challenges, Monta Vista
High School has also received an award for six years in a row for its website
layout.

“We have a lot of resources there and we make lesson plans for training,”
Kumaravel said. “A lot of other teams use our website.”

As Monta Vista High School’s Robotics Team continues to work toward educating
local students about the opportunities available through the robotics team,
other high schools in the San Jose area engage in similar robotics competition.

Bellarmine College Preparatory robotics team, Cheesy Poofs, in San Jose has
engaged in numerous robotics competitions and recently won the award for robot
programming at the Bay Area VEX Robotics Challenge.

According to Bellarmine senior Derrick Dominic, the student leader for the
Cheesy Poofs, the competitions are always fun because people come up with
interesting and innovative designs.

“The building process takes roughly a few months to get a good, solid prototype
design for a robot that can go into competition and do well,” Dominic said.
“It’s really exciting to see the level of the teams that show up and compete.”

Being on the robotics team has better prepared many students for college by
allowing them to work with tools, Kumaravel said.

"It showed me what engineering was about," Kumaravel said. "I know a lot of
people who go into college who think they want to do engineering and then they
change their mind."

However, students on the robotics team have to face many challenges when
building a robot therefore, when attending to college they are more experienced
than students who have never been exposed to engineering, Kumaravel added.

Kumaravel wants to study mechanical engineering in college and has been looking
for universities that have good programs for both undergraduate and graduate
students in that field, he said.

"I think its really nice that we have places like this in our campus and it
really helps people learn what engineering is all about," Kumaravel said. "We
are a team sport; we are one giant family."
